# Automating Interpret and Compile Tests

Our lexing and parsing tests already process all examples automatically and print out any mismatches with the reference CPython implementation.

Now is a good time to implement the same in the interpretation and compilation test harnesses.

We start by moving most of the code out into a `process` function, which will lex, parse, evaluate the code, and compare the result with a CPython eval. Then we rewrite the entrypoints to call it for each sample and each test file.

# Unifying Value Structures

While our interpreter and compiler currently use essentially identical representations of runtime values, they are implemented completely independently. We will unify the two.

We move the compiler's `ctypes`-based definitions into a shared module and rewrite the interpreter to use these.

We need to deal with functions for the interpreter, but we functions are currently not first-class in the compiler. We introduce methods to the value class that start with `interpreted_` and can rely on the inrepreter context as an escape hatch.

One other issue is that the generic dynamic value class has a variable size payload field. This is easy to read using `ctypes`, as we can simply represent it as an empty (size 0) array of bytes and cast it at runtime based on the type tag. Unfortunately, writing these fields is impossible as `ctypes` will complain when we try to place an actual (not 0-sized) payload in the field.

Instead, we make a `derive_type` function which will dynamically create a new `ctypes.Structure` inherited from our value class, but including an extra field to store the payload. We will use this with the correct size when creating these values, and simply pass `0` when trying to read a value of an unknown type in the compiler harness, producing a 0-size array as before.

# Shortening the Generated IR

Because of all the dynamic type handling—the allocation of value structs and checking of their types—we end up with very large IRs for our programs.

We add code that measures IR size for our two test problems and record a baseline:

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 22132           |
| p2.07_gcd      | 11193           |

Looking at the generated code, we see that the actual computation is fairly short, and much of the code is just moving integers in and out of the dynamic values on the heap.

We will extract code for things like `make_int` into functions on the IR level to decrease this overhead.

First, we extract all our static code (external function declarations, type definitions) from the `compile` function into a multiple string. We will call this the "Prelude" of our generated IR.

Then, we define a simpler version of our `struct_sizeof` helper that does not rely on the compiler context. This cannot be an LLVM IR function because we need to pass a compile-time string to `getelementptr`:

```py
def struct_sizeof(x: str) -> str:
    return f"""
    %size_ptr = getelementptr {x}, ptr null, i64 1
    %size = ptrtoint ptr %size_ptr to i64
    """.lstrip().rstrip()
```

Now we add `make_none` to our prelude code:

```llvm
define ptr @make_none() {{
    {struct_sizeof("{i64}")}

    %res = call ptr @malloc(i64 %size)
    store i64 0, ptr %res

    ret ptr %res
}}
```

And change the `make_none` code in the compiler to output calls to this predefined subroutine instead:

```py
def make_none(self) -> str:
    res = self.next_id(prefix="none")
    self.emit(f"%{res} = call ptr @make_none()")

    return res
```

Finally, we can measure the impact on our IR size:

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 22137 (+5)      |
| p2.07_gcd      | 11198 (+5)      |

This is actually worse, but only because there are very few `None` values in our example programs. We repeat the above steps for `make_int` and measure:

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 18748 (85%)     |
| p2.07_gcd      | 9843 (88%)      |

Already we see a 15% reduction from the original IR.

We can do even better for integers by also extracting `expect_int` (and its helper `expect_type`) into IR functions:

```llvm
define void @expect_type(ptr %x, i64 %expected) {{
    %type_id = load i64, ptr %x

    %cond_i1 = icmp eq i64 %type_id, %expected
    br i1 %cond_i1, label %ok, label %crash

    crash:
    call i64 @puts(ptr @str.error)
    call void @abort()
    br label %ok

    ok:
    ret void
}}

define i64 @expect_int(ptr %x) {{
    call void @expect_type(ptr %x, i64 1)

    %ptr = getelementptr %struct.value, ptr %x, i64 0, i32 1
    %res = load i64, ptr %ptr

    ret i64 %res
}}
```

Now measuring

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 12353 (56%)     |
| p2.07_gcd      | 7804 (70%)      |

Now we can extract `make_bool`:

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 10062 (45%)     |
| p2.07_gcd      | 7132 (64%)      |

And `make_float` (for a slight regression as floats are not used in the test problems):

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 10392 (47%)     |
| p2.07_gcd      | 7462 (67%)      |

And, finally, `expect_float` and `expect_bool`:

| Problem        | IR Size (bytes) |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| p2.01_is_prime | 9086 (41%)      |
| p2.07_gcd      | 6602 (59%)      |

For an almost 2x reduction in IR size.

# Improving IR Identifiers

Consider the following generated code:

```llvm
%_const.data.3 = bitcast i64 17 to i64
%make_int.res.4 = call ptr @make_int(i64 %_const.data.3)
```

The identifier name for the `make_int` output is not very descriptive. We create a new identifier creation function that can take a base identifier to use as the prefix of the newly generated one: `next_id_derived`. Now we change the code generated for `make_int` to use it, resulting in a much more readable IR:

```llvm
%_const.data.3 = bitcast i64 17 to i64
%_const.data.$int.4 = call ptr @make_int(i64 %_const.data.3)
```
