# Strings

We will implement strings next. This is very similar to a lot of the work in previous parts so it is pretty straightforward.

## Lexing

First, we write the regexes for [the `stringliteral` grammar token and its parts.](https://docs.python.org/3.13/reference/lexical_analysis.html#string-and-bytes-literals)

We also implement a `str_value` function on our tokens that extracts the actual value from a string token, cutting off the quotes, handling escapes, etc.

Our smoketest for strings will include an escape for quotation marks and one of the named escapes:

```py
"hello \"quote\" \n world"
```

## Parsing

We allow `Literal` nodes to contain a string token [as per the spec.](https://docs.python.org/3.13/reference/expressions.html#literals)

## Interpreting

We implement a new payload type for `VpyValue` to store string data. To deal with the variable size data, we use the same `derive_type` trick as we did for the main `VpyValue` class.

## Compiling

We introduce a pre-processing pass to our compilation flow. We visit every AST node without emitting any code, just extracting information that we will need later.

For literal strings, we extract their data into global constants that will end up in the `data` section of our compiled code. The main difficulty here is in rewriting non-ASCII characters to the LLVM IR format.

Since we are storing all string data statically, we might as well pre-create the value structs as well.

The resulting LLVM IR is as follows:

```llvm
@str.1 = private unnamed_addr constant {i64, {i64, [21 x i8]}} {
  i64 4,
  {i64, [21 x i8]} {
    i64 21,
    ; "hello \"quote\" \n world"
    [21 x i8] c"hello \22quote\22 \0A world"
  }
}
```

We use it by simply referring to the global value struct as a pointer: `%_const.data.2 = bitcast ptr @str.1 to ptr`
