# Lists

Next up is lists.

## Lexing

Works without changes, using the following test:
```py
[[1], 0.9, [1, 2], True]
```

## Parsing

Implement [`enclosure`,](https://docs.python.org/3.13/reference/expressions.html#grammar-token-python-grammar-enclosure) [`list_display`,](https://docs.python.org/3.13/reference/expressions.html#grammar-token-python-grammar-list_display) and its child [`flexible_expression`.](https://docs.python.org/3.13/reference/expressions.html#grammar-token-python-grammar-flexible_expression_list)

## Interpreting

First, we add a new `VpyValueDataList` class to represent list-typed values.

This needs a new type ID, type payload struct, and conversion methods that follow the same dynamically-sized structure approach as for the base values type and strings.

We also make a generic `from_python` method that calls the correct constructor based on the provided native Python value, for use in converting the list contents which can be of arbitrary type.

Finally, we make the necessary tiny changes in the interpreter AST visitor itself.

### Garbage Collection with `ctypes`
It is tempting to store the list contents as an array of plain integers, standing in for the pointers to our dynamically-typed values. This, however, will break when we try to create instances of lists from Python. The cause is the Python garbage collector, as shown in this example:
```py
import gc
from ctypes import addressof
# see https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html#ctypes.addressof

def make_list():
    inner = VpyValue.from_int(10)
    res = VpyValue.make_list(len=1, contents=[addressof(inner)])

    del inner
    # `inner` goes out of scope

    gc.collect()
    # !!! `inner` gets garbage collected
    # the pointer in the list is now *invalid*

    retun res

data = make_list()

inner_again = cast(data[0], POINTER(VpyValue))
print(inner_again) # prints random garbage
```

Instead, we need to tell `ctypes` that we are storing pointers, so it prevents the pointee memory from being garbage collected.

### Value Payload Type Erasure
Our list values do not remember the types of their contents, so we can only produce raw `VpyValue` instances, which do not carry a payload. We adjust all the `expect_` methods to check for a `data` field. If the field is not present, we use the fact that we know the payload type from the type ID carried in the raw value, and derive the payload-containing `VpyValue` based on the payload size. Then, we use the full value to compute the corresponding Python value.

For example, here is `expect_int`:
```py
def expect_int(self) -> int:
    assert self.type_id == VpyTypeId.int.value

    if not hasattr(self, "data"):
        # this is `VpyValue` rather than `VpyValue.derive_type`
        real_type = self.derive_type(sizeof(VpyValueDataInt))
        return cast(pointer(self), POINTER(real_type)).contents.expect_int()

    ...
```

## Compiling

We add the `@make_list` and `@expect_list` subroutines to the prelude. We make a small change to `@struct_sizeof` to allow modifying the output variable name. This is used to calculate the size of `ptr`, which is the size of each list item.

`@make_list` only allocates the list structure with the correct tag and length specifier (and `memset`s each item to `0xdeadbeef`). It is the responsibility of the caller to set the list items.

The changes to the actual code generation are minor.

### Debugging Generated Assembly
When initially implementing `@make_list`, we've made a mistake in the call to `memset`, which caused it to overflow the list. This caused stack corruption which would occasionally be detected by Python and crash the program.

To debug this, we needed to examine the sizes generated by `struct_sizeof`, which means looking at the code emitted from the LLVM IR rather than at the IR itself.

For this, an option called `print_asm` was added in `test_compile.py` to allow printing the actual target-dependent assembly which LLVM produces for our code. This is done by taking the LLVM `target_machine` and using its `emit_assembly` function. It is also advisable to call `target_machine.set_asm_verbosity` to get some explanatory comments in the generated assembly.
